# Translations README

Based on GNU gettext, kusion implements support for internationalization(i18n). There is 
basic sketch of the workflow of using and updating/adding translations.

## Using translations

To use translations, you must use the convention syntax to write strings in source codes, 
i.e. the .go files.

There are two funcs provided, `i18n.T` and `i18n.Error`.

```go
import "kusionstack.io/kusion/pkg/util/i18n"

// Get a translated string
translated := i18n.T("Your message in english here")

// Get a translated plural string
translated := i18n.T("You had % items", items)

// Translated error
return i18n.Error("Something bad happened")

// Translated plural error
return i18n.Error("%d bad things happened")
```

In kusion, translations are used for cmd, including `short description`, `long description`, 
`example`, `flag description`. There are some conventions when using translations:

- The translation string must be a sentence, and start with capital letter;
- For `short description` and `flag description`, the sentence must end without full stop. 
For `long description`, must end with full stop. For `example`, it depends on the semantic;
- Use func `i18n.T` without plural translation in usual, and the package name must be `i18n`. 
If func `i18n.Error` is in use, should update `hack/update-translations.sh`; 
- When using `i18n.T`, the input string must be a const, variable is not allowed, which is 
the restriction of `go-xgettext`;
- Be sure that `i18n.T` will be executed, don't use `i18n.T` to create a global variables, 
which is generated when compiling;
- When using back quote to define a string, write a paragraph in one line without line break,
or there is unexpected space in translations. When a line break is needed, the new line should
start with two tabs;
- When new commands added, update `CMD_FILES` in `hack/update-translations.sh`.

Refer to `pkg/cmd/init/init.go`, which is an example to show how to use i18n.

## Updating Translations Files

GNU gettext realizes i18n based on three files: `.pot`, `.po`, `.mo`. There are usages: 

- `.pot` is the template file, used to extract i18n strings from `.go` source codes;
- `.po` is for human translator. `.pot` can generate the template of `.po` for different 
languages, and then translator translates and save the result in `.po`;
- `.mo` is for machine using. `.mo` is generated by `.po` and paired with `.po`.

In kusion, two languages is supported for now, `en_US` and `zh_CN`, where the former is the
default language. The `.pot` is `pkg/util/i18n/translations/kusion/template.pot`, the `.po` 
is `pkg/util/i18n/translations/kusion/<language>/LC_MESSAGES/kusion.po`, and the `.mo` is 
`pkg/util/i18n/translations/kusion/<language>/LC_MESSAGES/kusion.mo`.

`pkg/util/i18n/translations/test` is for testing, do not edit it.

### Extracting strings

`go-xgettext` is used to extract `.pot` from `.go` files, and `msgmerge` is used to update 
the template of `.po`. First, install the commands:

```console
# install go-xgettext
go install github.com/gosexy/gettext/go-xgettext

# install gettext to use msgmerge
brew install gettext
```

Then, run `hack/update-translations.sh` under repo root path, to update the `.pot` file and 
the templates of `.po` files.

### Translating
After executing the script, you will find the `msgid` updated but left `msgstr` empty in 
`.po`. Now, You need to do the translation job, translate the `msgid` in `en_US` to `msgstr` 
in the specified language.

`poedit` is a popular open source tool for translations. You can load the `.po` file, add or
update the translations. When finishing translating and save `.po` file, the corresponding 
`.mo` file with same prefix in the same directory will get updated automatically by `poedit`.

If you don't want to use `poedit`, after updating `.po`, you have to update `.mo` manually. 
You can use the following command, run under the corresponding language's translation dir:

```console 
msgfmt -c -v -o kusion.mo kusion.po
```

Because there is no need to do translation for default language `en_US`, `hack/update-translations.sh`
updates `.mo` for `en_US`. Hence, you don't need to do any job for `.po` and `.mo` for 
`en_US` at all.

### Updating Docs
When the above jobs are done, `i18n` will work for the software. But in kusion, you need to 
update the docs, run `hack/gen-docs/main.go` to update the docs under `docs/cmd`. You can 
specify the doc directory and language env key by args, which is in usual not needed.

### Adding a New Language
Which is similar to the above steps, the only thing is to update `knownTranslations` in 
`pkg/util/i18n/i18n.go`, `TRANSLATIONS_LANG` in `hack/update-translations.sh`, `docsMatrix` 
in `hack/gen-docs/main.go`.
